Asynchronous Socket Programming
What is 'asynchronous socket programming'? 
a.k.a. event-driven programming or select()-based multiplexing, it's a solution to a network programming problem: 
How do I talk to bunch of different network connections at once, all within one process/thread?

Let's say you're writing a database server that accepts requests via a tcp connection. If you expect to have many 
simultaneous requests coming in, you might look at the following options: 

•synchronous: you handle one request at a time, each in turn.
pros: simple 
cons: any one request can hold up all the other requests 

•fork: you start a new process to handle each request.
pros: easy 
cons: does not scale well, hundreds of connections means hundreds of processes.
fork() is the Unix programmer's hammer. Because it's available, every problem looks like a nail. It's usually overkill 

•threads: start a new thread to handle each request.
pros: easy, and kinder to the kernel than using fork, since threads usually have much less overhead
cons: your machine may not have threads, and threaded programming can get very complicated very fast, with worries about 
controlling access to shared resources. 

With async, or 'event-driven' programming, you cooperatively schedule the cpu or other resources you wish to apply to 
each connection. How you do this really depends on the application - and it's not always possible or reasonable to try. 
But if you can capture the state of any one connection, and divide the work it will do into relatively small pieces, 
then this solution might work for you. If your connections do not require much (or any) state, then this is an ideal approach.

pros: 
• efficient and elegant 
• scales well - hundreds of connections means only hundreds of socket/state objects, not hundreds of threads or processes. 
• requires no interlocking for access to shared resources. If your database provides no interlocking of its own (as is the 
case for dbm, dbz, and berkeley db), than the need to serialize access to the database is provided trivially. 
• integrates easily with event-driven window-system programming. GUI programs that use blocking network calls are not very graceful. 
cons: • more complex - you may need to build state machines. 
• requires a fundamentally different approach to programming that can be confusing at first. 



Writing a single-process multiplexing socket program

Now how do we apply our bucket wisdom to network programming? 

Depending on the operating system, there are several different ways to achieve our 'bucket-trickling' affect. By far the most 
common, and simplest mechanism uses the select() system call. The select() function takes (in effect) four arguments: three 
'lists' of sockets, and a timeout. The three socket lists indicate interest in read, write, and exception events for each 
socket listed. The function will return whenever the indicated socket fires one of these events. If nothing happens within 
the timeout period, the function simply returns. 

The result of the select() function is three lists telling you which sockets fired which events. 

Your application will have a handler for each expected event type. This handler will perform different tasks depending on your 
application. If a connection has a need to keep state information, you'll probably end up writing a state machine to handle 
transitions between different behaviors. Diving back into the bucket [paradigm], these events might be the equivalent of adding 
little "I'm full now" mailbox-like flags to the buckets. 

Animating the server using select() is easy: A simple event loop will suffice. I usually use a loop with a 30-second timeout. 
That way, I can do any necessary housekeeping tasks at least every 30 seconds. 
